All right now.
In the previous segment,
we saw how to compute PPMI,
positive pointwise mutual information.
In this segment,
we'll see how to take those values and
compute similarity between words.
First, let's talk about a different
kind of context than just word context.
A common way to define
context is to use syntax.
And this again relates back to early
linguistic arguments that the meaning
has to do with the restriction of
combination of entities grammatically.
So in other words, two words are similar
if they have similar parse contexts.
And we haven't talked a lot about parsing,
but to give you the intuition, the words
duty and the words responsibility can
both be modified by similar adjectives,
so we can have additional duty,
administrative duty, assumed duty, or
additional responsibility, administrative
responsibility, assumed responsibility.
And they can also be objects of similar
verbs; assert duty, assign a duty,
assume a duty, assign a responsibility,
assume a responsibility.
So it's not just that they have
similar words around them, but
that their grammatical
context can be similar.
They have similar parse context.
And we can capture this by using
co-occurrence vectors that are based on
syntactic dependencies.
So we say that the context,
instead of being counts of words with
previous ten words or following ten words.
The context instead are how many times
I have a particular word as my subject,
or how many times I've a particular
word as my adjectival modifier.
So here's an example from.
We have the word sell, and
we say, how often was this
the subject of the verb absorb?
Well once.
How often was the subject
of the verb adapt?
How about the subject verb of behave?
How about the prepositional
object of inside?
So, we can get our counts for
each of this context.
And now, our vector is determine to not by
accounts of words that
occurred in ten words of me.
But counts of times I occurred
are particular grammatical relation with
the context.
And just as we saw with word counts,
we can use PMI or
PPMI to our dependency relations.
So the intuition comes from early work by
Don Hindle and if I count in a corpus, and
I parse the corpus and I see that the verb
drink has the object it three times and
it has the I drink anything three times,
I drink wine twice,
I drink liquid twice and so on.
Well, drink it, or drink anything,
are in fact more common than drink wine,
but we'd like to say that wine is
a more drinkable thing than it.
If I found a wine occurring a lot
with a verb, two different verbs,
I would think that those verbs are
probably similar, more than if I found,
it occurring as the object
of the two verbs.
And if I compute the PMIs,
the PMI between the object of the verb and
the verb, drink.
And now I see that wine and
tea and liquid have a much
higher PMI than it or anything.
So if I sort by PMI,
now I see that tea and liquid and
wine are the most associated words
to be the object of the verb drink.
So PMI used for noun associations
of a word in the context,
and also for word associations for
dependency relations.
All right, now we've seen how
to compute the term context or
word context matrix,
how to weight it with PMI.
And we've talked about computing
in two ways based on just
words that are in my
neighborhood of ten words.
Or whether I'm in a particular syntactic
or grammatical relationship with words.
Now we're ready to use those to
compute the actual similarity.
In the cosine metric,
we're going to use just the same cosine
that we saw from information retrieval.
So remember we had a dot product, we said
that the cosine similarity between two
vectors, two vectors indicating
the counts of words.
It's just the dot product between
the similarity is the dot product
between the two words normalized
by the length of the two vectors.
So the dot product v dot w
over length of v times length
of w or we could compute, think of it
as computing separate unit vectors that
normalizing v by its length, normalizing
w by its length to get unit vectors, and
just multiplying them together.
Or we can multiply the whole thing out,
so here's our dot product.
For each dimension of v and each dimension
of w, we multiply the values together and
then we normalize by the square root of
the sum squared values to get the length
of the vectors.
And now, we let's say we're doing PPMI, so
this sub i is the PPMI value for
word v in context i.
And w sub i is the PPMI value for
word w in context i.
And remember that cosine asymmetric
if two vectors are orthogonal,
we're going to have a cosine of 0.
If they point in opposite directions,
we have a cosine -1.
If they point in the same direction,
they'll have a cosine of plus 1.
And it turns out that raw frequency or
PPMI are non-negative,
they're always 0 or greater.
So that means that the cosine
range is always 0 to 1,
we're always on this part of the slope.
So cosine as a similarity metric,
if we use PPMI weighted counts.
We're going to get all roughly
conceived for that matter.
We're going to get a number between 0 and
1.
So let's compute,
use cosine to compute similarity.
You and I have taken a little subset
of the example we saw earlier.
So we have apricot,
digital and information.
And we have the context vector.
We have large data and computer.
I'm just going to use counts here
instead of PPMI values just for
making the example more simple to see,
but in real life of course we'd use PPMI.
So, the cosine between apricot and
information is the dot product.
So, from apricot to information
we have one times one
plus zero times six plus zero times one or
one plus zero plus zero.
Over the square root of the length
of apricot one squared plus zero
squared plus zero squared over
the length of information one squared
plus six squared plus one squared.
And that's going to be one over
the square root of 38 or 0.16.
And similarly, the cosine between
digital information we have from digital
to information we have 0 times 1,
plus 1 times 6, plus 2 times 1, so
that's going to be 0 plus six plus 2 over
the square root of the length digital.
So that's, the length of digital,
I'm sorry.
So that's the square root of 0
squared plus 1 squared plus 2 squared,
so root of 0 plus 1 plus 4.
And then the length of information missing
as we saw before, and now we get 0.58.
And similarly for apricot and digital,
now the dot product between apricot and
digital 1 times 0,
0 times 1, 0 time 2 is 0, so
we're going to get a similarity of 0.
There are a number of
possible similarity metrics.
Besides cosine, we can use the Jaccard
method that we saw earlier in information
retrieval, the Dice symmetric or there's
a family of information theoretic methods
like Jensen Shannon divergence that
can be also used for similarity.
But cosine is probably the most popular.
Similarity for distributional methods
is evaluated just the same as it is for
thesaurus-based methods, either intrinsic
evaluation where compute its correlation
with some human number,
human word similarity number.
Or extrinsically, we pick some
task like taking the TOEFL exam or
detecting spelling errors where
we can compute some error rate.
And now we see if our similarity
metric results in a better error rate.
In summary,
distributional similarity metrics use
a method of association like PPMI and
a metric for similarity like cosine to
give you a similarity between two words.
And distributional and
thesaurus based methods both
very useful in deciding if two words
are similar for any NLP application.